okay welcome back to natural language
processing the next topic for today is
going to be part of speech tagging part
of speech tagging is one of the most
fundamental occasions of statistics to
natural language processing let's define
first what the POS or part of speech
task is so here's an example we have a
sentence that I just got from the news
yesterday Bahrain is vote in the second
round of parliamentary election we have
eight words and each of those words
needs to be associated with a part of
speech so what are the parts of speech
those are things like nouns and verbs
and prepositions and articles here's
another example from the famous poem the
Jabberwocky by Lewis Carroll from Alice
Through the Looking Glass in 1872 you
may have seen this point before it's
really funny it includes a lot of
nonsensical words so let me read a few
words from it twas brillig and the
slithy Toves did gyre and jimbo in the
way as you can see this is a lot of
those words are not real words and yet
we can figure out most of their parts of
speech so for example the word gyre Gyr
II it's very likely a verb because it
follows did and then by analogy the word
Gimpo or Jimbo is also a verb the word
wave is most likely a noun because it
follows the word though so as you can
see we can get a lot of morphological
and part-of-speech information from the
words even if they're not real words
another example is the word tous if that
is a noun we know that the S indicates
plural if it's a verb we know that it
indicates third-person and in fact this
set of two words at the end of the first
sentence is actually ambiguous so slide
it Taos can mean an adjective followed
by a noun but it can also mean a noun
followed by a verb each of those makes
sense and it would be difficult to
figure out which one it is without any
additional context or information what
about the word mimsy well mimsy has two
reasons to be classified as an adjective
first is its ending which is consistent
with many other adjectives but it also
follows the word all which also
indicates that this could be
an adjective and finally the word ball
goes is clearly a noun because it
follows the word Dow so what are the
parts of speech that I used in English
well they belong to two different
categories one is the so-called open
class those are classes where you can
add new words any time and things that
correspond to new words so you can have
nouns non-model verbs adjectives and
adverbs and you can also have closed
class parts of speech for example
prepositions modal verbs conjunctions
particles determiners and pronouns it's
very difficult to invent new instances
of those although it is possible in some
cases for example these recent use of
the word Z as a gender-neutral pronoun
so for the purpose of this class we're
going to use the so called penty back to
accent here's some examples of tags that
I use there the first example is a
coordinating conjunction word like and
it's labeled as a CC the second category
is cardinal numbers for example 117
which is labeled as CD then determiner
existential they're foreign word and so
on typically the first two characters I
used to denote the part of speech so for
example JJ is an adjective and the third
and additional characters if there
exists I used to give some additional
information about that part of speech so
for example JJ stands for adjectives but
JJ R is a comparative adjective for
example greener and JJ s is a
superlative adjective for example
greenest similarly n n stands for the
simplest type of noun a singular noun
like table and then S stands for plural
noun so something that ends with s
typically like tables and then P stands
for proper singular noun such as John
and find on the N and P S stands for
plural proper nouns such as Vikings so
the next slide has a few more Bentley
Bank tags set examples so for example
our B is used for an adverb VB is used
for a base form of the verb some of the
other interesting forms for verbs are vb
d for past tense of the verb that's not
necessarily a needy form so for example
you have your verbs like
take have forms like took as their past
tense which would nevertheless be
labeled as V BD v BG is a gerund of
present participle typically an ing form
v BN is the past participle so it's
normally an e D form just like v BD but
for irregular words like take it's a
specific word like taken and finally we
have V BP which is used for the non
third-person singular present like take
one other interesting observation is
that all the prepositions are labeled
with the label in I n as you can see on
the previous slide except for the
proposition 2 which gets its own label
because it's often used as a particle in
the cases like to go so don't be
confused by this fact in the label in
does not indicate just the preposition
and it indicates any preposition except
for the preposition to and the tag tio
is only used for the preposition to even
when it's used as a particle it's a
little confusing but there are good
reasons why the people who develop the
penn treebank tag said did it this way
let's not make some observations words
in English are often ambiguous so for
example the word count can be a noun and
it can also be a verb 11% of all the
types in the brown corpus are ambiguous
however does two also tend to be the
most frequent words so if you look at
the number of tokens instead of the
number of types it turns out that the
whole 40% of old talk is in the bank
corpus are ambiguous so here's some
examples from the penn treebank corpus
the would like you can have as many as
five different tags a DP verb a DJ a DV
and a noun the word present can be tied
as an adjective and noun a verb and an
adverb so some more examples here's some
words that are very ambiguous in English
but not as obviously as the previous one
so for example the first one here if you
look at it for the first time you might
think of it as uh non biggest word
however it can not only be part of two
different parts of speech noun and verb
but it can also be pronounced
differently so you can say transport as
a verb or a transport
and this interesting property applies to
the other words in the sequence so you
can say I object to something and then
you can say I achieve the object from
the room you can discount something and
you can get a discount and you can
address somebody and you can leave at a
certain address another similar example
is the word content which can be an
adjective or a noun and have different
meanings in both cases so it turns out
that having the part of speech is
important also for pronunciation
purposes so for example in French many
words can be pronounced differently
depending on the part of speech even if
the spending is exactly the same so here
three examples the first one is spelled
est but in French it can be two
different words one of them is the third
person singular of the verb to be in
which case this word is pronounced just
a or it can be the word for East in
which case it's pronounced as esthe so
in one case the verb is pronounced one
way and the other case the noun is
pronounced in a different way the second
example is the word crazy down which
means president if it's a noun and it's
pronounced as I said president but it
can also be a verb in which case it's
pronounced as precede the ENT is silent
and it corresponds to the third-person
plural of the verb President to preside
and the final example here is a word
like feasts which can be pronounced
differently as I said feasts which means
son or as fee just Fi if it means the
plural of the word fee which is strength
so in this case it's the additional
morphological information about this
noun whether it's singular plural that
tells us how to pronounce it the three
main techniques for part of speech
tagging which we're going to look at in
the next slides the first one is the
rule based technique the second one is
based on machine learning specifically
tools like conditional random fields
hidden Markov models or maximum entropy
Markov models and the third one is
something called the transformation
based learning all those methods are
valid and used in the real life part of
speech tagging however machine learning
methods and transformation based methods
are more powerful than the whole base
because it's
much more easier much easier to scale
them to other languages and to other
domains because they are trained
automatically part of speech tag is very
important because it applies to parsing
translation text-to-speech word sense
disambiguation and so on pretty much all
the major components of a natural
language processing system depend on
proper part of speech tagging let's look
at an example Bethlehem Steel
Corporation hammered by higher costs so
in this case the word costs is labeled
as a noun plural and ns
compare this with Bethlehem Steel
Corporation hammered by higher cost
where it cost is labeled as a verb so
given that both of those tags are valid
interpretations of the word costs how do
we know which one to pick
in the sentence to complete its part of
speech assignments well obviously the
first example is correct the second one
is incorrect but how does the part of
speech system really know this
information so one possible approach is
just use baseline probabilities look at
the number of times that costs appears
in the training data and see how many
times that word has been labeled as a
noun and see how many times it has been
labeled as a verb and pick the one that
is more frequent so this would be
essentially a unigram
part of speech tire and other
possibilities to consider the word
before so for example what is the
probability that costs is going to be a
noun given that the previous word is the
word higher and what's the probability
that costs is a verb given that the
previous word is the word higher well
clearly in this case it's more likely
that the first interpretation is valid
because after an adjective we're more
likely to see a noun than a verb which
actually leads me to another model that
can be used in this example instead of
looking at the previous in the current
word we can look at the part of speech
of the previous word and the current
word so we can just say that we're going
to pick whatever interpretation of costs
is consistent with the fact that the
previous word is an adjective no matter
what adjective we're looking at so that
the examples that I gave you are first a
unigram model second one is the
background model that looks at words and
the third one is a background order that
looks at the current word and the part
of speech of the previous fourth now
visit together Paris speech
previous word you have to label the
words in sequence starting left to right
if you want to consider the part of
speech of the word the current word then
you would need to do this from the right
hand side going left
so what sources of information can you
use to label words so in the example
here the knowledge about individual
words is useful so the fact that costs
is a noun or a verb you can look at
lexical information what the information
is available in the dictionary about
that word you can look at the spelling
so for example words that end in O are
are likely to be nouns like let's say
the word suitor or vector and so on
whereas where's it heading est I'm more
likely to be superlative forms of
adjectives you can also look at
capitalization so things like IBM or
capital letters is most likely to be an
organization or product and not let's
say an adjective or common noun you can
also use the knowledge about the
neighboring words as in the examples
that I just mentioned you can look at
the previous word the word after maybe
the two previous words or the previous
word and the power of speech of the word
before and so on okay now before we
introduce the specific techniques for
para speech tagging let's decide for us
how we're going to evaluate their
performance well it turns out that the
very bottom speech dices very
straightforward
however there's a problem with the high
baseline the high baseline comes from
the fact that we can tag each word with
its most likely tag and tag each other
vocabulary word as a noun
this bassline alone gives us a 90%
accuracy in predicting the part of
speech of the next word so any automatic
system that we come up with will have to
be significantly higher than 90% to be
useful so the current accuracy of the
best part of speech tire is around 97
percent for English and this is just
slightly below the upper bound expected
from human performance which is about 98
percent it turns out that in two percent
of the cases humans don't agree with
each other and most of the time this
happens when an adjective is used as a
noun for example in a noun noun compound
for example the word college senior is
two consecutive nouns in other cases the
first word in
non-face kin in a now non compound can
be an adjective that is used as a noun
or a noun that is used as an adjective
for example a senior class the word
senior can be used as a noun as an
adjective and humans don't necessarily
agree which part of speech it is okay
now let's talk about the first type of
part of speech tagging and so-called
rule based methods so this typically
done by using a set of finite state
automata specifically finite state
transducers to find all the possible
parts of speech for given a sequence of
words and then use disambiguation rules
that make some of those transitions
possible compared to others so for
example we can have a rule that says
that an article can never be followed by
verbs every time we see a transition
from an article to a verb in the machine
we're going to remove it from the
possible set of outputs so we can define
hundreds of constraints like this
manually and then call them in the
finite state transducers so here's an
example from a paper that I worked on
many years ago for French part of speech
tagging so we have here sequence of
words on the left-hand side let endure
my yin and uranium they are in the air
the encode delicata calculate which
stands for the average content of
uranium in the rivers even though
difficult to compute if we want to tag
the sentence how do we do this well
first of all we have to find all the
possible parts of speech that are
associated with each of those words so
we put those in the second column so s
as the beginning of a sentence is marked
with a special symbol caret which
indicates beginning of sentence the word
lock can be many different things in
French it can be a pronoun it can be a
noun and so on the next word tuner is
interesting it's a noun in both cases
but it can mean different things where
it's singing in feminine or in masculine
in this example it is in feminine so the
correct tank here would be NFS the next
word muy Yin can be near an adjective or
a noun or verb and the verb can be
either first or second or third person
and so on and so forth so we have a
sequence of parts of speech and now we
have to get rid of some of those and as
I said before the seekers article verb
is not a la
and so on let's look at some specific
examples so key we can have a rule that
says that a third person subject
personal pronoun cannot be followed by a
first person in direct personal pronoun
so if the example is in mu 4 which
stands for we need the would ill has the
tag for a third-person singular personal
pronoun and the word nu has several
possible tags some of which are first
person indirect personal pronouns and
some of which are direct personal pause
and we can get rid of the ones that
combine bs3 with be I want so that
removes one of the alternatives for the
tags of mu and keeps the other for he's
not an example of a constraint and
followed by K and stands for noun K
stands for interrogative pronoun so for
example in the sentence LeFleur key
there we've heard that we want to label
the second word key as a relative
pronoun not as an interrogative pronouns
so we want to get rid of the K tag and
use the alternative E as the only
acceptable choice and finally the
example that I gave it before article
cannot be followed by a verb so for
example in the sentence that consists
contains the words lapel the word a pal
can only be a verb but the word al can
be either an article or personal pronoun
so this who here RV helps us get rid of
one of those and eliminate the article
therefore unambiguously determining that
the word al is a pronoun so this is just
a small set of examples from a large
system that had hundreds of rules and
you can imagine looking at those
examples that it's very difficult to
build systems you need a lot of
linguists to be involved they often they
don't necessarily agree with each other
and the whole process can be very
time-consuming so who based systems have
their purpose and can sometimes be very
useful especially for NC languages but
most of the time part of speech tagging
in these days is done using completely
automated methods such as HMMs and
transformation based learning methods so
we're going to look at some more
examples of part of speech tagging in
the next few slides